
=head1 SYNOPSIS

  GMODTools is a collection of perl scripts for use
  with GMOD Chado databases, primarily at this point
  for loading and extracting miscellaneous sequences.
  
  Many of the sequence functions are in library module
    GMOD::Chado::SeqUtils -- common methods for these chado seq scripts
  with main programs in bin/ folder as summarized below.
  
  It is based on GMOD release 0.001 (January 2004) and can
  be expected to change or go obsolete.  Besides contents of
  this package, requirements to run include the perl modules
  installed with GMOD release, esp. Chado::LoadDBI/AutoDBI and
  its ancestor classes from CPAN - Class::DBI, Ima::DBI, etc.
  
  This was written for use with the nascent Daphnia genome database,
  wFleaBase, at http://eugenes.org/daphnia/ See also further information
  at http://eugenes.org/daphnia/database

  
=head1 NAME

gmod_init_db.pl

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  A simple script to create the Chado database and tables
  based on test_load.pl.   d.gilbert added:
    parts to load in initialize.sql, 
    add new organisms, 
    add user choice of ontologies, which must exist in GMOD_ROOT/data/ontologies/

  Assumes that Chado::LoadDBI is available for ontologies


=head1 NAME

gmod_load_newseq.pl

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Load a file of miscellany sequences into chado db, generating public IDs.
Sequences are assumed to be non-genomic, not located.

=head1 NOTES

Good for small seqs: cDNA, EST, microsats, ; left out genome-sized
methods. Need for nascent daphnia wFleaBase to get sequence public IDs
Cut from gmod_load_gff3.pl



=head1 NAME

gmod_dump_seq.pl - Print sequences from ChadoDB

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Dump sequence file of Chado features, with feature props, synonyms, dbxrefs
xSelect by organism, by 'pub' = input file,  seq type, feat props 
Need for nascent daphnia wFleaBase to use sequence public IDs

Good for small seqs: cDNA, EST, microsats. Left out genome-sized methods. 
Only does fasta format now


=head1 NAME

  gmod_list_db.pl

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Summarize feature entries in a Chado database, by publication (input file),
by Seq. Ontology type (cDNA, EST, etc.), by organism.  Add other categories
as needed.


=head1 SEE ALSO

  gmod_init_db.pl -- initialize a new database, adding organisms, intialize.sql,
     ontology data sets.
     
  gmod_dump_seq.pl -- output sequences selected by organism, publication (input file),
     seq type.
     
  gmod_list_db.pl  -- show feature statistics for chado db: # per organism, per seq type,
    per publication/infile, and checksum test for sequence duplications.

  GMOD::Chado::SeqUtils -- common methods for these chado seq scripts

=head1 AUTHORS

  Don Gilbert, Feb 2004
